Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. You'll sometimes find that collectors of
science fiction and fantasy books are into comics also. In fact, collecting
comics is becoming a more widespread hobby all the time, and often you'll find
collectible comics at a specialty store that handles science fiction, fantasy,
and gaming material. Bob Wayne owns such a store in Fort Worth, Texas, called
Fantastic Worlds Bookstore, and he also collects comics. When he asked him how
an interested newcomer might get into comic book collecting, he had some words
of caution. Well, the first recommendation I make to people, if they come in and
say, I read that so-and-so comic book has gone up a thousand percent in two
years. What comic book would you recommend that I should start collecting? I
tell people that they really shouldn't be buying comics unless they enjoy
reading comics. If there's nothing in that comic they enjoy reading, then
they're making a mistake getting into comics because there are other things they
could invest money in that people will not laugh at you when you go to the bank
and tell them that you want to use it for collateral. So comic books as an
investment is the kind of thing that's really been overplayed in the media to
some extent. I mean, it sounds real good for the few comics that have
appreciated a great deal of value, but speaking from experience, a bank does not
really think that that's the kind of collateral they want to hold for a loan. So
stocks and bonds still sound preferable to me as investments. But what if
someone did take up comic book collecting? What about storing and preserving
them? If you're going to keep a comic book for a collection, it's important to
handle it carefully. And if you're going to keep it, you should bag it up at
least in a plastic bag. If you have a comic book that's worth over $50, $100,
you might want to invest in bags of a type of plastic in which a lot of the
things that would be in a plastic that would potentially cause the comic to
deteriorate in 50 or 100 years would be neutralized. And if you want to go
further along, if you have comic books that are worth hundreds of dollars, there
are things in the paper, the process of making pulp paper, that will eventually
cause it to rot. You can have the stuff deacidified. But there's no point in
doing this with just every comic book on the shelf. And actually, if you don't
have any errors and you don't plan to be donating these to a library or
something, comic books, if they're handled properly, are going to outlive you
most likely. So there's no real danger involved. They should be kept away from
high humidity and excessive extremes of temperature and kept in a dry and cool
place and kept out of direct sunlight.
Wayne pointed out to us that there's been a big change in the comic book
industry in the past few years, one that will affect collectors. The biggest
thing that's happened in comic books recently, is probably the biggest thing
that's happened since comic books began, is that the ownership of some of the
characters is now being held by the individual creators in much the same way
that a publisher does not own a novel by Isaac Asimov. Isaac Asimov would own
the copyright. And now comic books are coming out where the writer or the artist
or both own the copyright to the character and the publisher is publishing it
for them in the same kind of relationship that a book publisher has with a
novelist. And this is a complete change in the former system of the publisher
owning everything, everything being done on a work-for-hire basis, as though the
artist was just coming in and doing the same type of function as sweeping the
floors inside the corporate offices. This is going to be a change that's going
to become more and more evident in the next few years and is going to create a
lot more excitement within the comic book field. We'll talk more about comics
with Bob Wayne on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. We're talking with Bob Wayne, comic book
collector and owner of the Fantastic Worlds Bookstore in Fort Worth, Texas.
Comic book collecting has become a rage recently. The prices of some collectible
comics have risen almost 1,000% in just a few years. On our last show, Bob Wayne
explained some things about comic book collecting and advised the unwary
newcomer to be extremely cautious when entering the field. He also mentioned a
big change that's taken place recently in the publishing of comic books. The one
who creates and draws a strip has complete rights over his work, just like the
author of a novel. This means a comic book artist could change publishing
companies and move to where he can get the best contract. We asked Wayne what
this change would mean to collectors, and he gave us an interesting answer. I
have to go back a little bit. The other thing that has changed the comic book
industry is the change in distribution, where at one time all the comic books
pretty much were available at 7-11s and drugstores. And if 7-11 bought
them from a distributor, the same people used it that handled TV Guide and Time
Magazine and such things, and they got a bundle of comic books in, and what they
didn't sell they sent back for credit. And this meant that the publishers had to
print, just like on anything else, had to print, you know, let's say 500,000 and
they sold 200,000, and 300,000 got thrown away. With the rise of specialty shops
that sell comic books and science fiction books, those shops order their comics
in a different fashion. They order them non-returnable. They get a better
discount, but they have to keep everything they order. And it's now to the point
where a lot of comic book titles are being published only in the non-returnable
format. So if a person's only buying their comic books at a 7-11 or in a
small town that doesn't have a specialty store, there are a number of titles
they would never have seen. In fact, there are titles that are being published
only for specialty store distribution that are selling better than some of the
comic books that have distribution in both forms. Examples of this would be
Camelot 3000 from DC Comics, which takes the King Arthur saga and brings it back
to life, but in the year 3000. Starslayer from Pacific Comics, which is moving
to another company called First Comics, which takes a man from out of the past
and springs him into the future, where he goes around and fights alien menaces
and zooms from galaxy to galaxy. These titles are only published in specialty
stores. And the thing with a book like Starslayer, which is written and drawn
by Mike Grell, who used to work for DC Comics doing The Warlord, is that Mike
Grell owns the copyright to Starslayer. And the fact that Mike Grell owns the
copyright means that when his contract with the publisher Pacific Comics expired
with issue number six, he was able to find a better deal and make more money for
himself and take it to First Comics, a new publishing company out of Chicago,
for starting with issue number seven.
Wayne says this change, which allows a comic book character to switch publishing
companies, is a very recent one, and he likens it to the situation that exists
in book publishing. The idea that a person could move a character from one
company to another for a better financial deal had never occurred to anyone a
few years ago under the old system of publishing. But in the same way in book
publishing, that not every novel by an author necessarily is going to come out
from the same publisher, there's no reason for every issue of a comic book to
come out from the same publisher. Some of the ramifications of this new
situation should be obvious to collectors. One difference may well be that a
collector devoted to a particular character or artist will have to follow him
through a number of publishing companies. Perhaps a collector will be required
to buy more issues, too, in order to acquire a complete set of something. Also,
it should be more difficult to locate and catalog characters and artists, since
they will probably be spread out over more companies. But for dedicated comic
book collectors, the new situation may be a beneficial one after all. Sure. With
more competition, there will likely be more comics and more artists, and
therefore more material for collectors to work with.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Poetry and science fiction, two unlikely
candidates for a merger, but they go together very well. As practitioners of the
art and members of the Science Fiction Poetry Association will tell you. The
Science Fiction Radio Show spoke with some people in the Science Fiction Poetry
Association about what exactly science fiction poetry is. Gene Van Troyer,
science fiction author and editor of a mainstream literary magazine, responds.
Well, it's been around for quite a while. It's only been really in recent years
that the term science fiction poetry came into usage. I think about 1974 was
when the term was first used, and it was coined by, well, it wasn't coined by
anybody, but it was just used as a label by Peter Dillingham, who was an early
prosodist and theorist of science fiction poetry, and Stephen Gregg, who edited
Eternity Science Fiction, which was the first science fiction magazine to really
incorporate poetry as an integral part of its format. What is science fiction
poetry? Well, I really can't say what science fiction poetry is in terms of a
definition, because no one has ever defined science fiction or poetry. So
science fiction poetry has no real definition. But I generally tend to class
science fiction poetry as something containing an element which is usually
associated with science fiction. In other words, speculative element of outer
space or of biology or of time or whatnot. So that's my loose definition. It's
important to realize that what we now are calling science fiction poetry has
been written in the so-called mainstream for a long time. William Blake is a
really primary example of someone who wrote mystical poetry, but in order to do
it, he created alternate worlds and an ability to travel between this world or
the world of London that he knew and his imaginary England, which he called
Albion. Well, that's fantasy. That's science fiction. That's alternate world
imagination.
In more modern times, there's W.H. Auden, who has written a number of poems
which would be scientifically oriented, as well as science fictional, because
they speculate about eventual results of scientific discoveries. One of the most
striking examples of what I would call science fiction poetry is something that
was done by Richard Wilber, a well-established mainstream poet. And this poem is
called The Mind-Reader. Now, this is a poem about a person who actually reads
minds, and he makes his living by reading minds. Now, I don't think Richard
Wilber would call it science fiction, although maybe in the back of his mind,
he's working with the idea that, well, this is usually a science fiction theme.
But it's really a very well-done poem. And the point about science fiction
poetry and mainstream poetry is that to be a good poem, a science fiction poem
must first be a good poem. And then, content-wise, it diverges from what we
normally recognize or would normally class as mainstream poetry.
The Science Fiction Poetry Association was founded in 1978 by Suzette Haden
Elgin, a mainstream novelist, who saw there was no meeting point for poets in
the science fiction field. There are a number of well-known science fiction
writers who are members of the Science Fiction Poetry Association. Theodore
Sturgeon, Ursula Le Guin, Gregory Benford, Ed Bryant, and Gene Wolfe are a few.
We asked Bob Frazier, editor of the Science Fiction Poetry Association
newsletter, to tell us what the newsletter accomplishes. At the moment, the
newsletter seems to be the focus of the organization because we don't have any
great amount of business that is important to us. We're sort of like a very
small non-profit organization, just basically people getting to know each other
and setting up workshops at conventions, doing readings, teaching each other a
little bit about poetry, helping each other find good markets. We'll talk more
about poetry and science fiction on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. We are speaking with some of the members
of the Science Fiction Poetry Association, practicing poets and science fiction
authors who feel that poetry and science fiction go well together. We asked Bob
Frazier, editor of the Science Fiction Poetry Association newsletter, Starline,
if most of the group's members are science fiction fans. It seems to work out
that way, but percentage-wise it's probably, well, 75%, I would say, but I
should think it should be 90% in one sense, and I feel it shows that we do have
at least 25% membership of people who just are interested in poetry altogether,
which is healthy. I mean, we're not trying to be separate from the mainstream of
literary mainstream with poetry, that's for sure. What's the difference between
regular poetry and science fiction poetry? Well, there's several arguments about
that. I think my basic viewpoint is that if it's science fiction or fantasy
poetry, if it's published within that genre, and because a lot of the poetry
really doesn't necessarily have to have unicorns or spaceships in it, a lot of
it can be about very peripheral things. I'd call them speculative things. We
asked Frazier for an example of something speculative. Well, have you ever
picked up a telephone and heard someone talking on the line somewhere far in the
distance? It's another conversation between two other people. Well, say you
wrote a poem about that in the context of, like, there were telephone ghosts
that kind of live in the telephone line, okay? That would be a mainstream poem,
or it could be a science fiction poem, because it deals sort of in that, the
same realm that imagination, that fantastic imagination is in.
We asked Gene Van Troyer, science fiction poet and author, if there was anything
in style or technique that distinguished regular poetry from science fiction
poetry. Any style can be used. You can use it in very rigidly metered and rhymed
poetic forms, which we usually call traditional poetic forms, sestinas, sonnets,
villanils, and so forth, or it can use the free verse or the modern poetic
techniques that you would see, say, William Carlos Williams using or Charles
Olson using. We asked Bob Frazier to give us some titles of books and magazines
that contain science fiction poetry. I suggest a book called Holding Your Eight
Hands. It's been reprinted as a paperback by Doubleday last year. It originally
was published in 1969. The editor is Edward Lucy Smith, and it's a collection of
science fiction poetry, an international collection, actually, although not
widely international, has British and, I think, some Australian authors and
American authors in it. There's an anthology of poetry coming out from a man
here in Denver, Steve Rasnic Tem, and it's an offshoot of a magazine he's been
editing of speculative poetry for three or four years. It's called the Umbral
Anthology, and it will use poetry out of what I see as the history of science
fiction poetry. There's also, coming up, an anthology in a couple of years by
Bruce McAllister and Dick Allen, who are both writers of science fiction poetry
and both people who work in academic jobs in the United States, which is going
to attempt to do the same thing, create a comprehensive anthology of some sort.
And there is Starline, which is our newsletter, which publishes original poetry,
markets. We have a workshop in there. We have news related to science fiction
and poetry. We have letter columns and everything that basically ties our
organization together. We'll conclude our discussion of science fiction and
poetry on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. This will be our final show on science
fiction and poetry, and on the Science Fiction Poetry Association. The Science
Fiction Poetry Association was founded as a formal organization in 1978. Its
members, which include some big-name science fiction authors, believe that
science fiction and poetry are a natural blend. They publish a newsletter, meet
occasionally at science fiction conventions, read each other's poems, and help
each other find markets for their work. Does science fiction poetry have
anything to offer that regular poetry doesn't? We asked this question of Bob
Frazier, editor of the Science Fiction Poetry Association newsletter, Starline.
Yes. Today, science has found some things about the universe, especially let's
use physics as an example, or found some things. Because science has become so
specialized, and that any scientist today is almost a specialist in his field,
we are discovering the real depths of a lot of science, including psychology.
But let's pick physics, okay. They've come up against things like black holes,
singularities, monopoles. And these are things which cannot be systematically
and rationally explained. And you will find in the scientific texts that are
discussing these possibilities, these kind of rips in Einsteinian space-time
continuum, or however you want to look at them. They're anomalies. The science
books are using, like Carl Sagan will use a poem, for example, to help explain,
to help visualize what it could possibly be or how it exists. And because poetry
can, in a small space, deal with something which can be abstract, it doesn't
always have to be abstract, and it doesn't have to be unreadable, and it doesn't
have to be boring, but because it can deal with some things that are abstract in
a small amount of space. Poetry can be, or poetic talk, even if it's in a prose
sense, or even in a speech, can deal with abstract things nicely.
Gene Van Troyer, author and poet in the science fiction field, sees science
fiction poetry as a significant recombining of two things that should go
together. I think one thing that's important to distinguish also is that science
fiction poetry itself, I think represents a refusion of science and poetry. Up
until the last decade, as a matter of fact, it was very voguish, very faddish
for poets and poetry-type people to view poetry and art and science as mutually
exclusive. And this is a totally artificial separation, because poetic
expression comes from the same wellsprings that the ordering process we see in
science comes from. It's the need to put order on the universe. Well, in the
Renaissance, you didn't see this really drastic split between science and art.
They were viewed as being the same thing. But I mentioned William Blake earlier,
and it seems to me that around the time of William Blake, disillusionment with
the Industrial Revolution and science was already setting in, and William Blake
is rabidly anti-science. And personally, I feel that he was mistaken in this
particular aspect. But he looked around the world that he saw, and things were
terrible. People were enslaved almost by the industrial system, and he was just
rabidly opposed to it because it oppressed the spirit. It oppressed the soul.
Well, now, I think this is a forerunner of the split that gradually grew from
about the latter part of the 18th century up until the present time in the 20th
century. But it's gradually coming back together, and you see a lot more science
showing up in poetry, and poets feeling much more confident about expressing
things out of science in their poetry, as well as scientists falling back on
poetry to explicate things.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.